README.md, before:

# OverType

A lightweight markdown editor library with perfect WYSIWYG alignment using an invisible textarea overlay technique. Includes optional toolbar. ~45KB minified with all features.

## Features

- 👻 **Invisible textarea overlay** - Transparent input layer overlaid on styled preview for seamless editing
- 🎨 **Global theming** - Solar (light) and Cave (dark) themes that apply to all instances
- ⌨️ **Keyboard shortcuts** - Common markdown shortcuts (Cmd/Ctrl+B for bold, etc.)
- 📱 **Mobile optimized** - Responsive design with mobile-specific styles
- 🔄 **DOM persistence aware** - Recovers from existing DOM (perfect for HyperClay and similar platforms)
- 🚀 **Lightweight** - ~45KB minified
- 🎯 **Optional toolbar** - Clean, minimal toolbar with all essential formatting
- ✨ **Smart shortcuts** - Keyboard shortcuts with selection preservation
- 🔧 **Framework agnostic** - Works with React, Vue, vanilla JS, and more

## How it works

![OverType Architecture Diagram](https://websharebox.s3.amazonaws.com/diagram.png)

We overlap an invisible textarea on top of styled output, giving the illusion of editing styled text using a plain textarea.

## Comparisons

| Feature | OverType | HyperMD | Milkdown | TUI Editor | EasyMDE |
|---------|----------|---------|----------|------------|---------|
| **Size** | ~45KB | 364.02 KB | 344.51 KB | 560.99 KB | 323.69 KB |
| **Dependencies** | Bundled | CodeMirror | ProseMirror + plugins | Multiple libs | CodeMirror |
| **Setup** | Single file | Complex config | Build step required | Complex config | Moderate |
| **Approach** | Invisible textarea | ContentEditable | ContentEditable | ContentEditable | CodeMirror |
| **Mobile** | Perfect native | Issues common | Issues common | Issues common | Limited |
| **Markdown syntax** | Visible | Hidden | Hidden | Toggle | Visible |
| **Advanced features** | Basic | Full | Full | Full | Moderate |
| **Best for** | Simple, fast, mobile | Full WYSIWYG | Modern frameworks | Enterprise apps | Classic editing |

**Choose OverType when you need:**
- Tiny bundle size (10x smaller than alternatives)
- Zero dependencies - single file that works immediately
- Perfect native browser features (undo/redo, mobile keyboards, spellcheck)
- Dead-simple integration without build tools
- Easy to understand, modify, and extend
- Excellent mobile support with visible markdown syntax

**Choose other editors when you need:**
- Full WYSIWYG with hidden markdown syntax
- Advanced features like tables, diagrams, or collaborative editing
- Rich plugin ecosystems
- Enterprise features and extensive customization
- Framework-specific integration (React, Vue, etc.)
- Complex multi-layered architecture for deep customization

## Installation

### NPM
```bash
npm install overtype
```

### CDN
```html
<script src="https://unpkg.com/overtype/dist/overtype.min.js"></script>
```

## Quick Start

```javascript
// Create a single editor
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  value: '# Hello World',
  theme: 'solar'
});

// Get/set content
editor.getValue();
editor.setValue('# New Content');

// Change theme
editor.setTheme('cave');
```

## Usage

### Basic Editor

```html
<div id="editor" style="height: 400px;"></div>

<script>
  const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
    placeholder: 'Start typing markdown...',
    value: '# Welcome\n\nStart writing **markdown** here!',
    onChange: (value, instance) => {
      console.log('Content changed:', value);
    }
  });
</script>
```

### Toolbar

```javascript
// Enable the toolbar
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  toolbar: true,  // Enables the toolbar
  value: '# Document\n\nSelect text and use the toolbar buttons!'
});

// Toolbar provides:
// - Bold, Italic formatting
// - Heading levels (H1, H2, H3)
// - Links, inline code, code blocks
// - Bullet and numbered lists
// - All with keyboard shortcuts!
```

### Keyboard Shortcuts

The toolbar and keyboard shortcuts work together seamlessly:

- **Cmd/Ctrl + B** - Bold
- **Cmd/Ctrl + I** - Italic
- **Cmd/Ctrl + K** - Insert link
- **Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 7** - Numbered list
- **Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 8** - Bullet list

All shortcuts preserve text selection, allowing you to apply multiple formats quickly.

### Multiple Editors

```javascript
// Initialize multiple editors at once
const editors = OverType.init('.markdown-editor', {
  theme: 'cave',
  fontSize: '16px'
});

// Each editor is independent
editors.forEach((editor, index) => {
  editor.setValue(`# Editor ${index + 1}`);
});
```

### Custom Theme

```javascript
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  theme: {
    name: 'my-theme',
    colors: {
      bgPrimary: '#faf0ca',
      bgSecondary: '#ffffff',
      text: '#0d3b66',
      h1: '#f95738',
      h2: '#ee964b',
      h3: '#3d8a51',
      strong: '#ee964b',
      em: '#f95738',
      link: '#0d3b66',
      code: '#0d3b66',
      codeBg: 'rgba(244, 211, 94, 0.2)',
      blockquote: '#5a7a9b',
      hr: '#5a7a9b',
      syntaxMarker: 'rgba(13, 59, 102, 0.52)',
      cursor: '#f95738',
      selection: 'rgba(244, 211, 94, 0.4)'
    }
  }
});
```

### Stats Bar

Enable a built-in stats bar that shows character, word, and line counts:

```javascript
// Enable stats bar on initialization
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  showStats: true
});

// Show or hide stats bar dynamically
editor.showStats(true);  // Show
editor.showStats(false); // Hide

// Custom stats format
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  showStats: true,
  statsFormatter: (stats) => {
    // stats object contains: { chars, words, lines, line, column }
    return `<span>${stats.chars} characters</span>
            <span>${stats.words} words</span>
            <span>${stats.lines} lines</span>
            <span>Line ${stats.line}, Col ${stats.column}</span>`;
  }
});
```

The stats bar automatically adapts to your theme colors using CSS variables.

### React Component

```jsx
function MarkdownEditor({ value, onChange }) {
  const ref = useRef();
  const editorRef = useRef();
  
  useEffect(() => {
    const [instance] = OverType.init(ref.current, {
      value,
      onChange
    });
    editorRef.current = instance;
    
    return () => editorRef.current?.destroy();
  }, []);
  
  useEffect(() => {
    if (editorRef.current && value !== editorRef.current.getValue()) {
      editorRef.current.setValue(value);
    }
  }, [value]);
  
  return <div ref={ref} style={{ height: '400px' }} />;
}
```

## API

### Constructor

```javascript
new OverType(target, options)
```

**Parameters:**
- `target` - Selector string, Element, NodeList, or Array of elements
- `options` - Configuration object (see below)

**Returns:** Array of OverType instances (always an array, even for single element)

### Options

```javascript
{
  // Typography
  fontSize: '14px',
  lineHeight: 1.6,
  fontFamily: 'monospace',
  padding: '16px',
  
  // Theme - 'solar', 'cave', or custom theme object
  theme: 'solar',
  
  // Custom colors (override theme colors)
  colors: {
    h1: '#e63946',
    h2: '#457b9d',
    // ... any color variable
  },
  
  // Mobile styles (applied at <= 640px)
  mobile: {
    fontSize: '16px',
    padding: '12px',
    lineHeight: 1.5
  },
  
  // Behavior
  autofocus: false,
  placeholder: 'Start typing...',
  value: '',
  
  // Stats bar
  showStats: false,  // Enable/disable stats bar
  statsFormatter: (stats) => {  // Custom stats format
    return `${stats.chars} chars | ${stats.words} words`;
  },
  
  // Callbacks
  onChange: (value, instance) => {},
  onKeydown: (event, instance) => {}
}
```

### Instance Methods

```javascript
// Get current markdown content
editor.getValue()

// Set markdown content
editor.setValue(markdown)

// Change theme
editor.setTheme('cave')  // Built-in theme name
editor.setTheme(customThemeObject)  // Custom theme

// Focus/blur
editor.focus()
editor.blur()

// Show or hide stats bar
editor.showStats(true)   // Show stats
editor.showStats(false)  // Hide stats

// Check if initialized
editor.isInitialized()

// Re-initialize with new options
editor.reinit(options)

// Destroy the editor
editor.destroy()
```

### Static Methods

```javascript
// Set global theme (affects all instances)
OverType.setTheme('cave')  // Built-in theme
OverType.setTheme(customTheme)  // Custom theme object
OverType.setTheme('solar', { h1: '#custom' })  // Override specific colors

// Initialize multiple editors (same as constructor)
OverType.init(target, options)

// Get instance from element
OverType.getInstance(element)

// Destroy all instances
OverType.destroyAll()

// Access themes
OverType.themes.solar
OverType.themes.cave
```

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| Cmd/Ctrl + B | Toggle bold |
| Cmd/Ctrl + I | Toggle italic |
| Cmd/Ctrl + K | Wrap in code |
| Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + K | Insert link |
| Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 7 | Toggle numbered list |
| Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 8 | Toggle bullet list |

## Supported Markdown

- **Headers** - `# H1`, `## H2`, `### H3`
- **Bold** - `**text**` or `__text__`
- **Italic** - `*text*` or `_text_`
- **Code** - `` `inline code` ``
- **Links** - `[text](url)`
- **Lists** - `- item`, `* item`, `1. item`
- **Blockquotes** - `> quote`
- **Horizontal rule** - `---`, `***`, or `___`

Note: Markdown syntax remains visible but styled (e.g., `**bold**` shows with styled markers).

## DOM Persistence & Re-initialization

OverType is designed to work with platforms that persist DOM across page loads (like HyperClay):

```javascript
// Safe to call multiple times - will recover existing editors
OverType.init('.editor');

// The library will:
// 1. Check for existing OverType DOM structure
// 2. Recover content from existing textarea if found
// 3. Re-establish event bindings
// 4. Or create fresh editor if no existing DOM
```

## Examples

Check the `examples` folder for complete examples:

- `basic.html` - Simple single editor
- `multiple.html` - Multiple independent editors
- `custom-theme.html` - Theme customization
- `dynamic.html` - Dynamic creation/destruction

## Development

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Development build with watch
npm run dev

# Production build
npm run build

# Run tests
npm test

# Check bundle size
npm run size
```

## Browser Support

- Chrome 62+
- Firefox 78+
- Safari 16+
- Edge (Chromium)

Requires support for:
- CSS Custom Properties
- ES6 features
- Lookbehind assertions in RegExp (for italic parsing)

## Architecture

OverType uses a unique invisible textarea overlay approach:

1. **Two perfectly aligned layers:**
   - Invisible textarea (top) - handles input and cursor
   - Styled preview div (bottom) - shows formatted markdown

2. **Character-perfect alignment:**
   - Monospace font required
   - No size changes in styling
   - Syntax markers remain visible

3. **Single source of truth:**
   - Textarea content drives everything
   - One-way data flow: textarea → parser → preview

## Contributors

Special thanks to:
- [Josh Doman](https://github.com/joshdoman) - Fixed inline code formatting preservation ([#6](https://github.com/panphora/overtype/pull/6))

## License

MIT

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

Commit message:

feat: Add Gmail-style link tooltips and fix critical issues
- Add Gmail/Google Docs style link tooltips for clickable URLs (#4)
- Fix tab key causing focus loss, now inserts spaces (#3)
- Fix code elements not inheriting font-size (#1)
- Merge PR #6: Fix inline code formatting (thanks @joshdoman)
- Add Limitations section to README (#5)
- Add CHANGELOG.md for version tracking

Breaking changes: None
Build size: 73KB (up from 45KB due to Floating UI)

README.md, after:

# OverType

A lightweight markdown editor library with perfect WYSIWYG alignment using an invisible textarea overlay technique. Includes optional toolbar. ~45KB minified with all features.

## Features

- 👻 **Invisible textarea overlay** - Transparent input layer overlaid on styled preview for seamless editing
- 🎨 **Global theming** - Solar (light) and Cave (dark) themes that apply to all instances
- ⌨️ **Keyboard shortcuts** - Common markdown shortcuts (Cmd/Ctrl+B for bold, etc.)
- 📱 **Mobile optimized** - Responsive design with mobile-specific styles
- 🔄 **DOM persistence aware** - Recovers from existing DOM (perfect for HyperClay and similar platforms)
- 🚀 **Lightweight** - ~45KB minified
- 🎯 **Optional toolbar** - Clean, minimal toolbar with all essential formatting
- ✨ **Smart shortcuts** - Keyboard shortcuts with selection preservation
- 🔧 **Framework agnostic** - Works with React, Vue, vanilla JS, and more

## How it works

![OverType Architecture Diagram](https://websharebox.s3.amazonaws.com/diagram.png)

We overlap an invisible textarea on top of styled output, giving the illusion of editing styled text using a plain textarea.

## Comparisons

| Feature | OverType | HyperMD | Milkdown | TUI Editor | EasyMDE |
|---------|----------|---------|----------|------------|---------|
| **Size** | ~45KB | 364.02 KB | 344.51 KB | 560.99 KB | 323.69 KB |
| **Dependencies** | Bundled | CodeMirror | ProseMirror + plugins | Multiple libs | CodeMirror |
| **Setup** | Single file | Complex config | Build step required | Complex config | Moderate |
| **Approach** | Invisible textarea | ContentEditable | ContentEditable | ContentEditable | CodeMirror |
| **Mobile** | Perfect native | Issues common | Issues common | Issues common | Limited |
| **Markdown syntax** | Visible | Hidden | Hidden | Toggle | Visible |
| **Advanced features** | Basic | Full | Full | Full | Moderate |
| **Best for** | Simple, fast, mobile | Full WYSIWYG | Modern frameworks | Enterprise apps | Classic editing |

**Choose OverType when you need:**
- Tiny bundle size (10x smaller than alternatives)
- Zero dependencies - single file that works immediately
- Perfect native browser features (undo/redo, mobile keyboards, spellcheck)
- Dead-simple integration without build tools
- Easy to understand, modify, and extend
- Excellent mobile support with visible markdown syntax

**Choose other editors when you need:**
- Full WYSIWYG with hidden markdown syntax
- Advanced features like tables, diagrams, or collaborative editing
- Rich plugin ecosystems
- Enterprise features and extensive customization
- Framework-specific integration (React, Vue, etc.)
- Complex multi-layered architecture for deep customization

## Installation

### NPM
```bash
npm install overtype
```

### CDN
```html
<script src="https://unpkg.com/overtype/dist/overtype.min.js"></script>
```

## Quick Start

```javascript
// Create a single editor
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  value: '# Hello World',
  theme: 'solar'
});

// Get/set content
editor.getValue();
editor.setValue('# New Content');

// Change theme
editor.setTheme('cave');
```

## Usage

### Basic Editor

```html
<div id="editor" style="height: 400px;"></div>

<script>
  const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
    placeholder: 'Start typing markdown...',
    value: '# Welcome\n\nStart writing **markdown** here!',
    onChange: (value, instance) => {
      console.log('Content changed:', value);
    }
  });
</script>
```

### Toolbar

```javascript
// Enable the toolbar
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  toolbar: true,  // Enables the toolbar
  value: '# Document\n\nSelect text and use the toolbar buttons!'
});

// Toolbar provides:
// - Bold, Italic formatting
// - Heading levels (H1, H2, H3)
// - Links, inline code, code blocks
// - Bullet and numbered lists
// - All with keyboard shortcuts!
```

### Keyboard Shortcuts

The toolbar and keyboard shortcuts work together seamlessly:

- **Cmd/Ctrl + B** - Bold
- **Cmd/Ctrl + I** - Italic
- **Cmd/Ctrl + K** - Insert link
- **Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 7** - Numbered list
- **Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 8** - Bullet list

All shortcuts preserve text selection, allowing you to apply multiple formats quickly.

### Multiple Editors

```javascript
// Initialize multiple editors at once
const editors = OverType.init('.markdown-editor', {
  theme: 'cave',
  fontSize: '16px'
});

// Each editor is independent
editors.forEach((editor, index) => {
  editor.setValue(`# Editor ${index + 1}`);
});
```

### Custom Theme

```javascript
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  theme: {
    name: 'my-theme',
    colors: {
      bgPrimary: '#faf0ca',
      bgSecondary: '#ffffff',
      text: '#0d3b66',
      h1: '#f95738',
      h2: '#ee964b',
      h3: '#3d8a51',
      strong: '#ee964b',
      em: '#f95738',
      link: '#0d3b66',
      code: '#0d3b66',
      codeBg: 'rgba(244, 211, 94, 0.2)',
      blockquote: '#5a7a9b',
      hr: '#5a7a9b',
      syntaxMarker: 'rgba(13, 59, 102, 0.52)',
      cursor: '#f95738',
      selection: 'rgba(244, 211, 94, 0.4)'
    }
  }
});
```

### Stats Bar

Enable a built-in stats bar that shows character, word, and line counts:

```javascript
// Enable stats bar on initialization
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  showStats: true
});

// Show or hide stats bar dynamically
editor.showStats(true);  // Show
editor.showStats(false); // Hide

// Custom stats format
const [editor] = new OverType('#editor', {
  showStats: true,
  statsFormatter: (stats) => {
    // stats object contains: { chars, words, lines, line, column }
    return `<span>${stats.chars} characters</span>
            <span>${stats.words} words</span>
            <span>${stats.lines} lines</span>
            <span>Line ${stats.line}, Col ${stats.column}</span>`;
  }
});
```

The stats bar automatically adapts to your theme colors using CSS variables.

### React Component

```jsx
function MarkdownEditor({ value, onChange }) {
  const ref = useRef();
  const editorRef = useRef();
  
  useEffect(() => {
    const [instance] = OverType.init(ref.current, {
      value,
      onChange
    });
    editorRef.current = instance;
    
    return () => editorRef.current?.destroy();
  }, []);
  
  useEffect(() => {
    if (editorRef.current && value !== editorRef.current.getValue()) {
      editorRef.current.setValue(value);
    }
  }, [value]);
  
  return <div ref={ref} style={{ height: '400px' }} />;
}
```

## API

### Constructor

```javascript
new OverType(target, options)
```

**Parameters:**
- `target` - Selector string, Element, NodeList, or Array of elements
- `options` - Configuration object (see below)

**Returns:** Array of OverType instances (always an array, even for single element)

### Options

```javascript
{
  // Typography
  fontSize: '14px',
  lineHeight: 1.6,
  fontFamily: 'monospace',
  padding: '16px',
  
  // Theme - 'solar', 'cave', or custom theme object
  theme: 'solar',
  
  // Custom colors (override theme colors)
  colors: {
    h1: '#e63946',
    h2: '#457b9d',
    // ... any color variable
  },
  
  // Mobile styles (applied at <= 640px)
  mobile: {
    fontSize: '16px',
    padding: '12px',
    lineHeight: 1.5
  },
  
  // Behavior
  autofocus: false,
  placeholder: 'Start typing...',
  value: '',
  
  // Stats bar
  showStats: false,  // Enable/disable stats bar
  statsFormatter: (stats) => {  // Custom stats format
    return `${stats.chars} chars | ${stats.words} words`;
  },
  
  // Callbacks
  onChange: (value, instance) => {},
  onKeydown: (event, instance) => {}
}
```

### Instance Methods

```javascript
// Get current markdown content
editor.getValue()

// Set markdown content
editor.setValue(markdown)

// Change theme
editor.setTheme('cave')  // Built-in theme name
editor.setTheme(customThemeObject)  // Custom theme

// Focus/blur
editor.focus()
editor.blur()

// Show or hide stats bar
editor.showStats(true)   // Show stats
editor.showStats(false)  // Hide stats

// Check if initialized
editor.isInitialized()

// Re-initialize with new options
editor.reinit(options)

// Destroy the editor
editor.destroy()
```

### Static Methods

```javascript
// Set global theme (affects all instances)
OverType.setTheme('cave')  // Built-in theme
OverType.setTheme(customTheme)  // Custom theme object
OverType.setTheme('solar', { h1: '#custom' })  // Override specific colors

// Initialize multiple editors (same as constructor)
OverType.init(target, options)

// Get instance from element
OverType.getInstance(element)

// Destroy all instances
OverType.destroyAll()

// Access themes
OverType.themes.solar
OverType.themes.cave
```

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Shortcut | Action |
|----------|--------|
| Cmd/Ctrl + B | Toggle bold |
| Cmd/Ctrl + I | Toggle italic |
| Cmd/Ctrl + K | Wrap in code |
| Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + K | Insert link |
| Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 7 | Toggle numbered list |
| Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + 8 | Toggle bullet list |

## Supported Markdown

- **Headers** - `# H1`, `## H2`, `### H3`
- **Bold** - `**text**` or `__text__`
- **Italic** - `*text*` or `_text_`
- **Code** - `` `inline code` ``
- **Links** - `[text](url)`
- **Lists** - `- item`, `* item`, `1. item`
- **Blockquotes** - `> quote`
- **Horizontal rule** - `---`, `***`, or `___`

Note: Markdown syntax remains visible but styled (e.g., `**bold**` shows with styled markers).

## DOM Persistence & Re-initialization

OverType is designed to work with platforms that persist DOM across page loads (like HyperClay):

```javascript
// Safe to call multiple times - will recover existing editors
OverType.init('.editor');

// The library will:
// 1. Check for existing OverType DOM structure
// 2. Recover content from existing textarea if found
// 3. Re-establish event bindings
// 4. Or create fresh editor if no existing DOM
```

## Examples

Check the `examples` folder for complete examples:

- `basic.html` - Simple single editor
- `multiple.html` - Multiple independent editors
- `custom-theme.html` - Theme customization
- `dynamic.html` - Dynamic creation/destruction

## Limitations

Due to the transparent textarea overlay approach, OverType has some intentional design limitations:

### Images Not Supported
Images (`![alt](url)`) are not rendered. Variable-height images would break the character alignment between textarea and preview.

### Monospace Font Required
All text must use a monospace font to maintain alignment. Variable-width fonts would cause the textarea cursor position to drift from the visual text position.

### Fixed Font Size
All content must use the same font size. Different sizes for headers or other elements would break vertical alignment.

### Visible Markdown Syntax
All markdown formatting characters remain visible (e.g., `**bold**` shows the asterisks). This is intentional - hiding them would break the 1:1 character mapping.

### Links Require Modifier Key
Links are clickable with Cmd/Ctrl+Click only. Direct clicking would interfere with text editing since clicks need to position the cursor in the textarea.

These limitations are what enable OverType's core benefits: perfect native textarea behavior, tiny size, and zero complexity.

## Development

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Development build with watch
npm run dev

# Production build
npm run build

# Run tests
npm test

# Check bundle size
npm run size
```

## Browser Support

- Chrome 62+
- Firefox 78+
- Safari 16+
- Edge (Chromium)

Requires support for:
- CSS Custom Properties
- ES6 features
- Lookbehind assertions in RegExp (for italic parsing)

## Architecture

OverType uses a unique invisible textarea overlay approach:

1. **Two perfectly aligned layers:**
   - Invisible textarea (top) - handles input and cursor
   - Styled preview div (bottom) - shows formatted markdown

2. **Character-perfect alignment:**
   - Monospace font required
   - No size changes in styling
   - Syntax markers remain visible

3. **Single source of truth:**
   - Textarea content drives everything
   - One-way data flow: textarea → parser → preview

## Contributors

Special thanks to:
- [Josh Doman](https://github.com/joshdoman) - Fixed inline code formatting preservation ([#6](https://github.com/panphora/overtype/pull/6))

## License

MIT

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.
